---
author: Chris
title: "Installing Game of Active Directory on Proxmox: Part 6 - OpenVPN"
date: 2024-11-23
---

This is part 6 of my series on [Orange Cyberdefense's](https://github.com/Orange-Cyberdefense/GOAD/tree/main) Game of Active Directory (GOAD) on Proxmox VE. In the [fifth installment](https://christopherbauer.org/2024/11/18/goad-ansible.html) I covered how to use Ansible to configure the final domain layout and individual Windows VMs. In this post we'll setup the VPN server on pfSense to simulate an assumed breach.

As I mentioned before, I'm deeply indebted to Mayfly277's [canonical guide](https://mayfly277.github.io/posts/GOAD-on-proxmox-part1-install/?ref=benheater.com), and this post follows Mayfly277's work closely to provide readers with a resource to be used as a standalone or as a supplement.

Should you need more orientation to the context of this series, or on my rationale for creating it, see [first post](https://christopherbauer.org/2024/11/08/GOAD-networking.html) in this series.

Mayfly277's instructions for this VPN section left me scratching my head at various points. I found two steps where my setup would fail if I followed his instructions on my machine. I'll make note of those deviations in what follows.

## pfSense & OpenVPN

### Creating the CA

One note before we start, Mayfly277's [guide](https://mayfly277.github.io/posts/GOAD-on-proxmox-part1-install/?ref=benheater.com) has some helpful graphics on his screenshots to draw your eye directly to what needs modifying. Should you get confused about what needs modifying in the following steps, head over there and you should be able to sort it out quickly.

The first step involves creating a certificate authority to issue a certificate. Go to the system menu and select the Certificates option.
{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-23_1.png', '' %}

{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-23.png', '' %}

Under the Authorities tab click the green Add button at the bottom, and it'll take to to the following page where you'll give a descriptive name and a common name. I've used VLAN 30 (this is according to my [unique arrangement](https://christopherbauer.org/2024/11/08/GOAD-networking.html), if you followed Mayfly277's instructions you'd use 10).
{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-24.png', '' %}

Click save and you should have something like this:
{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-25.png', '' %}

### Create the Certificate Server

Click the Certificates tab, and click the green Add button at the bottom. That'll bring up the new certificate page where you'll add:

- Add a decriptive name
- Select the CA you created
- Set lifetime to 3650
- Add a common name
- Select the server certificate type

Then save.

{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-25_1.png', '' %}
{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-27.png', '' %}
{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-27_1.png', '' %}

Once you save the Certificates page will look like this:
{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-28.png', '' %}

### Create a VPN User

Now we'll create a local user who can access the VPN. Go to the System menu and select User Manager.
{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-28_1.png', '' %}

Under the Users tab, select the green Add button to create a new user.
{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-28_2.png', '' %}

Select a username and password, a descriptive name for the user certificate and select the CA you created.
{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-30.png', '' %}

Once you hit save the user page will look like this:
{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-31.png', '' %}

### Create the Open VPN Service

Now we'll create the service operating on the server. Go to the VPN menu and select OpenVPN.
{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-31_1.png', '' %}

Under the Servers tab, click on the Green add button. You'll make several modifications on this page. The first set are:

- Change the description
- Change Server mode to "Remote Access (SSL/TLS + User Auth)"
- Enter "Local Database" into the Backend for authentication field
- Change the local port to 2137
  {% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-32.png', '' %}

Modifications continued:

- Change Peer Certificate Authority to the CA you created
- Change Server certificate to the certificate you created
  {% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-33.png', '' %}

Modifications continued:

- Change IPv4 Tunnel Network to 10.10.10.0/24
- Change IPv4 Local network to 192.168.30.0/24
- Change concurent connections to 10
  {% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-34.png', '' %}

Modifications continued:

- Add the network configuration in the Topology dropdown to "net30 -- Isolated /30 network per client"
  {% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-35.png', '' %}

Finally, make sure:

- DNS Server Enabled is checked
- DNS server 1 reads 192.168.30.1 (this is according to my [unique arrangement](https://christopherbauer.org/2024/11/08/GOAD-networking.html), if you followed Mayfly277's instructions you'd use 10)
- That the Custom options field under Advanced Configruation reads "auth-nocache"

{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-36.png', '' %}
{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-36_1.png', '' %}

### OpenVPN Client Export Package

Now we'll search for and install the OpenVPN package for Client Export that'll add a new tab to the OpenVPN pages. Go to System and then Package Manager.

{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-37.png', '' %}

Enter "client-export" into the search term and click the green install button on the entry named "openvpn-client-export."

{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-37_1.png', '' %}

{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-37_2.png', '' %}

Next click the client export tab.
{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-38.png', '' %}

That'll bring up a new page where we'll create the VPN certificate for export.

{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_13-47.png', '' %}

This section of Mayfly277's guide was not clear on configuring the client export step. When mayfly277 says change the Host Name Resolution to "Other" in the exporting the client certificate step, there is a blurred image. In the context of these posts, where we're installing GOAD on a bare-metal instance of Proxmox with an existing true LAN, so we'll use _the IP of the Proxmox host_ for "Host Name."

Once you've done that, scoll to the bottom section OpenVPN clients and click under the Export column "Inline Configurations - Most Clients." Download that certificate to your Kali/attack machine.

### Enable the ovpns1 Interface

At this point there seemed to be something missing from Mayfly277's instructions. I eventually pieced together that I needed to enable the goadvpn interface with the help of [this blog](https://koller.ninja/proxmox-goad-lab). 

Head to the Interfaces menu and select assignments. There should now be an entry there called "goadvpn," click on that blue name/link on the left side. That'll open up its page and make sure the Enable Interface box is checked, then change the description and click the green Apply Changes box that comes up.
{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_14-18.png', '' %}
Your interface assignments will then look something like this:
{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_14-18_1.png', '' %}

You'll want to enable this interface before you get to the "Configure Firewall" steps.

### Firewall Rules Review

Honestly, the most challanging part of setting up GOAD was configuring the firewall rules, so take this review of my rules with a grain of salt. These work for me, but they took quite a bit of tinkering. I'm not an expert at firewall rules, so if you spot an error, please let me know by direct messaging me on Mastodon.

The WAN rules:
{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_14-03.png', '' %}

The LAN rules:
{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-23_10-18.png', '' %}

The VLAN rules:
{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_14-24.png', '' %}

The VPN rules:
{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-17_14-37.png', '' %}

*Post-series edit:* After writing up this series up and exploring on my own, I discovered that VLAN machines couldn't access the internet.  As a consquence, I couldn't make them call on my server to download payloads.  I looked into it, and as mentioned in [this github issue](https://github.com/Orange-Cyberdefense/GOAD/issues/177#issuecomment-1927681503), I think a rule is missing from the VLAN firewall.  To remedy the problem, I tried a number of targeted rules that essentially reversed the OVPN rule, to no effect. As a short-term workaround, I created an allow any any rule.  My VLAN rules are now kind of a mess, see below.

{% imagesmall '/img/2024-12-04_13-38.png', '' %}


## Confirming VPN Access to the Domain

Now use `sudo openvpn <YOUR_CERTIFICATE>` to connect, and it'll prompt you for the user and password you created. Once you do that, it should connect successfully.

To confirm you can reach the VLAN from your attacking machine, use NetExec to do a simple SMB sweep without a domain:

```
nxc smb 192.168.<YOUR_VLAN>.<HERE>
```

{% imagesmall '/img/2024-11-23_10-09.png', '' %}

## Concluding the Series

With that, you've confirmed that the domain is working and appropriately configured. You're now ready to pentest against the domain!

It's been a pleasure writing this up, and I hope someone finds it helpful.  If you do, please don't hesitate to leave me a note at Mastodon.
